README.md, before:

# Overview
*db_backup.py* is a _Python_ script for backing up _MySQL/MariaDB_ databases to an _S3_ bucket or a local directory.
Databases are read using _mysqldump_ , compressed with _gzip_ and backed up using [_rclone_](https://rclone.org/).

In an attempt to complete as many backups as possible, the script will
not exit on an error, but will report a non 0 exit code after all backups
have been attempted.

Local logging is to _standard out_ only, unless a log file
is specified with the flag _--log-file_, in which case messages are also logged to the file.
The configuration file is _/etc/backups.yaml_ unless a file is specified with the flag _--config_.

Logging to _Google Chat_ is supported. A separate [_loglevel_](https://docs.python.org/3/library/logging.html#logging-levels) can be configured.
That _loglevel_ must be higher than the general _loglevel_ to have any effect.
Setting the _loglevel_ to _WARNING_(30), would post only warnings  and above to _Google Chat_ if the general _loglevel_ is set to _INFO_(20).

Database backups are stored at the following path: `rootdir/backup_name/year/month/database_name+timestamp.sql.gz` on the _destination_.

The reporting of the size of backed up files, can be configured using *bitmath_prefix* (default: True) & *bitmath_system* (Default: SI). These values are parsed
directly to the [bitmap](https://bitmath.readthedocs.io/en/latest/module.html#bitmath-getsize) library. Read their documentation.

You can configure as many _backups_ as you want. Each _backup_ needs a _source_ and a _destination_.
A source can specify more than one database to be backed up.

```
rootdir: my_database_backups
rclone_config: /etc/rclone.conf
timeout: 600
loglevel: INFO
bitmath_system: SI
bitmath_bestprefix: yes
google_chat:
  url: https://chat.googleapis.com/v1/spaces/XXX/messages?key=XXX
  loglevel: WARNING
backups:
  backup_01:
    source:
      type: mysql
      host: db1.example.com
      port: 3306
      user: read_only_user
      password: 123456
      databases: [mysql, sys]
    destination:
      type: s3
      access_key_id: my_access_key_id
      bucket: my_bucket
      endpoint: my_endpoint
      secret_access_key: my_secret_access_key
  backup_02:
    source:
      type: mysql
      host: db2.example.com
      port: 3306
      user: read_only_user
      password: 654321
      databases: [sys]
      single-transaction: No
    destination:
      type: local
      path: /var/backups
```

* In _source_, _single-transaction_ defaults to _Yes_. This will dump _InnoDB_ databases without the need to lock them. 
* In _source_, _port_ defaults to the standard _MySQL_ port _3306_.

Environment variables *S3_BUCKET*, *S3_ENDPOINT*, *S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID* and *S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY* will be used
if matching parameters are not set in an S3 destination. This allows for simpler configuration if many
sources are to be backed up to single S3 destination. 

 
# Running db-backup
How to run db-backup.

## In Kubernetes with Helm
You can download the Helm chart in [this repository](https://github.com/tobiasbp/helm-charts/tree/master/charts/db-backup)
or you can install it by adding the Helm package repository as described below.

* Add repository to Helm: `helm repo add charts.balle-petersen.org https://charts.balle-petersen.org`
* Create local configuration file based on *helm/my_values.yaml* in this repository
* Install in Kubernetes as _my-db-backup_: `helm install my-db-backup charts.balle-petersen.org/db-backup -f my_values.yaml`

When updating configuration in _my_values.local.yaml_ in the future, or the chart is updated, the following
command can be used to upgrade the running release:
`helm upgrade my-db-backup charts.balle-petersen.org/db-backup -f my_values.yaml`

## In Docker
* Check out repository
* Build image: `docker build -t ddb .`
* Create a local config file (External to the container) at _/local/backups/backups.yaml_
* Run container once, and delete it: `docker run -v /local/backups:/etc/backups --rm ddb`

## Locally

* Check out repository
* Go to dir _src_
* Copy *backups.yaml* to *backups.local.yaml*
* Add your configuration to *backups.local.yaml*
* Run with : `./do-db-backup.py --config ./backups.local.yaml`

# Alternatives
Here are some alternatives I am aware of

## mysqldump for Kubernetes
[A Helm chart](https://hub.helm.sh/charts/stable/mysqldump) for setting
up _mysqldump_ to run as a cron job in Kubernetes.

* Only allows for a single mysql host.
* Relies on existing Kubernetes secret.
* Does not support _S3_
* Saves backup to local dir (Also to _SSH_, _Open Stack_ and _Google Cloud Storage_?)

## kubernetes-cloud-mysql-backup
[A shell script](https://github.com/benjamin-maynard/kubernetes-cloud-mysql-backup)
with Dockerfile, for backing up MySQL databases with _mysqldump_ and storing them
on _S3_ storage og _Google Cloud Storage_.

* Only allows for a single mysql host.
* No Helm chart.
* No Kubernetes config file in repository.
* Relies on existing Kubernetes secret.
* Supports logging to a _Slack_ channel.
* Saves backup to _S3_ and _Google Cloud Storage_.

## mysql-backup-chart
[A Helm chart](https://github.com/softonic/mysql-backup-chart) for
running database backups as a cron job in Kubernetes.

* Only allows for a single mysql host.
* Relies on existing Kubernetes secret.
* Saves backup to _S3_ and _Google Cloud Storage_.
* Two backup sources: _MySQL_ and _Coogle Cloud SQL_

# To do
- [x] Add backend _local_
- [x] Exit code should be non 0 if any errors occured during the backup run
- [x] Log to Google Chat
- [x] Add helm chart to public repo
- [ ] Add info on time spent on backup to log
- [x] Add info on size of file backed up to log
- [ ] Somehow expose a metric with time since last successful backup of a database
- [x] Spin out GoggleChatHandler in to seperate PyPI package for reuse (Someone else had a package. Now using it)
- [ ] Add config parameter for expected size of backup. Throw error/warning if backup is too small
- [ ] Add other rclone backends by looking at [rclone config](https://rclone.org/s3/#wasabi)
- [ ] Setting for max number of backups? Max age?
- [ ] Add option for encrypting backed up files
- [ ] Support encrypted MySQL connections
- [ ] Support dumping of all databases without naming them. (Could be default, if no databases mentioned)
- [ ] Validate configuration values
- [ ] When using the S3 backend, allow for non changing backup path to take advantage of versioning in S3
- [ ] Make separate kubernetes secret to hold the environment variables. Different teams could then have access to the source & destination credentials.

Commit message:

Added info on bulding docker image locally vs pulling from Docker Hub

README.md, after:

# Overview
*db_backup.py* is a _Python_ script for backing up _MySQL/MariaDB_ databases to an _S3_ bucket or a local directory.
Databases are read using _mysqldump_ , compressed with _gzip_ and backed up using [_rclone_](https://rclone.org/).

In an attempt to complete as many backups as possible, the script will
not exit on an error, but will report a non 0 exit code after all backups
have been attempted.

Local logging is to _standard out_ only, unless a log file
is specified with the flag _--log-file_, in which case messages are also logged to the file.
The configuration file is _/etc/backups.yaml_ unless a file is specified with the flag _--config_.

Logging to _Google Chat_ is supported. A separate [_loglevel_](https://docs.python.org/3/library/logging.html#logging-levels) can be configured.
That _loglevel_ must be higher than the general _loglevel_ to have any restrictive effect.
Setting the _loglevel_ to _WARNING_(30), would post only warnings  and above to _Google Chat_ if the general _loglevel_ is set to _INFO_(20).

Database backups are stored at the following sub path: `rootdir/backup_name/year/month/database_name+timestamp.sql.gz` on the _destination_.

The reporting of the size of backed up files, can be configured using *bitmath_prefix* (default: True) & *bitmath_system* (Default: SI). These values are parsed
directly to the [bitmap](https://bitmath.readthedocs.io/en/latest/module.html#bitmath-getsize) library. Read their documentation.

You can configure as many _backups_ as you want. Each _backup_ needs a _source_ and a _destination_.
A source can specify more than one database to be backed up.

```
rootdir: my_database_backups
rclone_config: /etc/rclone.conf
timeout: 600
loglevel: INFO
bitmath_system: SI
bitmath_bestprefix: yes
google_chat:
  url: https://chat.googleapis.com/v1/spaces/XXX/messages?key=XXX
  loglevel: WARNING
backups:
  backup_01:
    source:
      type: mysql
      host: db1.example.com
      port: 3306
      user: read_only_user
      password: 123456
      databases: [mysql, sys]
    destination:
      type: s3
      access_key_id: my_access_key_id
      bucket: my_bucket
      endpoint: my_endpoint
      secret_access_key: my_secret_access_key
  backup_02:
    source:
      type: mysql
      host: db2.example.com
      port: 3306
      user: read_only_user
      password: 654321
      databases: [sys]
      single-transaction: No
    destination:
      type: local
      path: /var/backups
```

* In _source_, _single-transaction_ defaults to _Yes_. This will dump _InnoDB_ databases without the need to lock them. 
* In _source_, _port_ defaults to the standard _MySQL_ port _3306_.

Environment variables *S3_BUCKET*, *S3_ENDPOINT*, *S3_ACCESS_KEY_ID* and *S3_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY* will be used
if matching parameters are not set in an S3 destination. This allows for simpler configuration if many
sources are to be backed up to single S3 destination. That is, config file has highest precedence.

 
# Running db-backup
How to run db-backup.

## In Kubernetes with Helm
You can download the Helm chart in [this repository](https://github.com/tobiasbp/helm-charts/tree/master/charts/db-backup)
or you can install it by adding the Helm package repository as described below.

* Add repository to Helm: `helm repo add charts.balle-petersen.org https://charts.balle-petersen.org`
* Create local configuration file based on *helm/my_values.yaml* in this repository
* Install in Kubernetes as _my-db-backup_: `helm install my-db-backup charts.balle-petersen.org/db-backup -f my_values.yaml`

When updating configuration in _my_values.local.yaml_ in the future, or the chart is updated, the following
command can be used to upgrade the running release:
`helm upgrade my-db-backup charts.balle-petersen.org/db-backup -f my_values.yaml`

## In Docker

### Build umage locally
* Check out repository
* Build image: `docker build -t ddb .`
* Create a local config file (External to the container) at _/local/backups/backups.yaml_
* Run container once, and delete it: `docker run -v /local/backups:/etc/backups --rm ddb`

### Pull image from Docker Hub
* Pull image: `docker pull tobiasbp/db-backup`
* Create a local config file (External to the container) at _/local/backups/backups.yaml_
* Run container once, and delete it: `docker run -v /local/backups:/etc/backups --rm tobiasbp/db-backup`

## Locally

* Check out repository
* Go to dir _src_
* Copy *backups.yaml* to *backups.local.yaml*
* Add your configuration to *backups.local.yaml*
* Run with : `./do-db-backup.py --config ./backups.local.yaml`

# Alternatives
Here are some alternatives I am aware of

## mysqldump for Kubernetes
[A Helm chart](https://hub.helm.sh/charts/stable/mysqldump) for setting
up _mysqldump_ to run as a cron job in Kubernetes.

* Only allows for a single mysql host.
* Relies on existing Kubernetes secret.
* Does not support _S3_
* Saves backup to local dir (Also to _SSH_, _Open Stack_ and _Google Cloud Storage_?)

## kubernetes-cloud-mysql-backup
[A shell script](https://github.com/benjamin-maynard/kubernetes-cloud-mysql-backup)
with Dockerfile, for backing up MySQL databases with _mysqldump_ and storing them
on _S3_ storage og _Google Cloud Storage_.

* Only allows for a single mysql host.
* No Helm chart.
* No Kubernetes config file in repository.
* Relies on existing Kubernetes secret.
* Supports logging to a _Slack_ channel.
* Saves backup to _S3_ and _Google Cloud Storage_.

## mysql-backup-chart
[A Helm chart](https://github.com/softonic/mysql-backup-chart) for
running database backups as a cron job in Kubernetes.

* Only allows for a single mysql host.
* Relies on existing Kubernetes secret.
* Saves backup to _S3_ and _Google Cloud Storage_.
* Two backup sources: _MySQL_ and _Coogle Cloud SQL_

# To do
- [x] Add backend _local_
- [x] Exit code should be non 0 if any errors occured during the backup run
- [x] Log to Google Chat
- [x] Add helm chart to public repo
- [ ] Add info on time spent on backup to log
- [x] Add info on size of file backed up to log
- [ ] Somehow expose a metric with time since last successful backup of a database
- [x] Spin out GoggleChatHandler in to seperate PyPI package for reuse (Someone else had a package. Now using it)
- [ ] Add config parameter for expected size of backup. Throw error/warning if backup is too small
- [ ] Add other rclone backends by looking at [rclone config](https://rclone.org/s3/#wasabi)
- [ ] Setting for max number of backups? Max age?
- [ ] Add option for encrypting backed up files
- [ ] Support encrypted MySQL connections
- [ ] Support dumping of all databases without naming them. (Could be default, if no databases mentioned)
- [ ] Validate configuration values
- [ ] When using the S3 backend, allow for non changing backup path to take advantage of versioning in S3
- [ ] Make separate kubernetes secret to hold the environment variables. Different teams could then have access to the source & destination credentials.
